There are three kinds of subatomic particles that are inside of an atom.  A proton is a subatomic particle that has a positive charge and is located inside the nucleus of the atom.  A neutron is a subatomic particle that has a neutral charge.  The electron is the third subatomic particle, and its charge is negative.  It is the only subatomic particle to be located outside of the nucleus.  The amount of each of these particles defines the properties of an element, which is one or more of the same atoms with unique properties.  Elements have two numeric values that are listed on the periodic table of elements.  The mass number is the decimal that is equal to the number of protons and neutrons combined.  The atomic number is the whole number that sorts the elements on the periodic table and is equal to the number of protons in the onucleus.  Elements are often written in chemical shorthand, specifically what is called the atomic symbol.  The atomic symbol consists of two letters, the first capitalized and the second lowercase.  

There are also isotopes of elements that have the same number of protons but different amounts of neutrons.  Isotopes are generally written using hyphen notation, which is the original element’s name, then a hyphen, and then the isotope’s mass number.  One of the important laws to remember when working with chemical problems is the law of the conservation of mass, which states that in chemical processes and reactions, matter is neither created nor destroyed.  

Units are often different when dealing with chemical problems.  An AMU, or atomic mass unit, is equal to one-half the weight of the mass of one unit of the isotope carbon-12, and it is usually used to measure atomic or molecular masses.  Another unit to remember is the mol, which is used to measure substances in general and can be directly converted through dimensional analysis into grams, atoms, or liters.  Dimensional analysis is best done using what is called the cross method.  To perform the cross method, you must first write down your given unit and value.  Next, draw a cross horizontally with your given unit in the top left.  In the bottom right, cancel the given units.  Then multiply across the top and divide by the number you used to cancel the units.  The remaining number should be your unit.  
